			   COPYRIGHT NOTICE

LaTeX sources for "Fast Algorithms for Towers of Finite Fields and Isogenies"
Copyright 2010 Luca De Feo
Drawings by Rachel Deyts, Copyright 2010 Rachel Deyts

Unless otherwise stated in this notice, the authors retain all the
rights on the files contained in this source distribution. 


		       Specially licensed files

Some files in this distribution are licensed under different
terms. When this is the case, the terms are specified in the file
and/or in this copyright notice.

To the extent possible under law, Luca De Feo has waived all copyright
and related or neighboring rights to the following files:
    these.cls
    these.tex
    pre/title.tex
Full terms at http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/

The file
    symb.gst
is licensed under the conditions of the LaTeX Project Public License,
either version 1.3 of this license or (at your option) any later
version.  The latest version of this license is in
http://www.latex-project.org/lppl.txt and version 1.3 or later is part
of all distributions of LaTeX version 2005/12/01 or later.

The files contained in 
    artwork/
are drawings by Rachel Deyts.  They are licensed by Rachel Deyts under
a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License. The
full license is available from
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/legalcode.

The file
    logos/by-sa.pdf
is a trademarked logo by Creative Commons. The original version is
available from http://creativecommons.org/about/downloads . Creative
Commons licenses it for the sole purpose of license marking. See
http://creativecommons.org/policies for the full license.

The files
    logos/inria.pdf
    logos/inria-color.pdf
    logos/lix.pdf
    logos/lix-color.pdf
    logos/x.pdf
    logos/x-color.pdf
belong to their respective institutions and are, as I understand,
licensed by the institutions to their employees.

			 END COPYRIGHT NOTICE



			      Rationale

I distribute the sources to my thesis for your commodity and personal
use, so that you can personalize and recompile them at your will. This
is mainly for printing reasons: for example you can modify the sources
to output a document on A4 or US-letter paper, possibly adapting the
margins to save paper and/or converting figures to black and
white. Any other modification you have in mind is also fine.

On the other hand, you are not free to distribute these sources or any
modified version of them. These terms may look unpleasantly
restrictive, but it ain't so: compiling the sources with pdflatex will
produce a pdf document licensed under a Creative Commons license.

In practice this means that you are free to use these sources to
produce (a modified version of) my thesis and distribute it, (provided
you adhere to the terms of the Creative Commons licence), but you
can't distribute those sources, whether they have been modified or
not.

This also means that you are not allowed to take the text appearing in
LaTeX comments or other LaTeX constructs that produce no output, and
distribute it. This applies in particular to the commands \pdfmcone,
\pdfmctwo and \pdfmcthree, which you could be tempted of modifying so
that they render their content in a pdf margin comment (a feature that
I used during the review process of my thesis and whose use I
definitely don't want to appear in a final product).

If you are fond of legalistic nonsenses, I'll also tell you that it is
perfectly fine to take all the content of my thesis and make a .tex
file containing all of it, then distribute it under any license
compatible with the Creative Commons one, as long as your .tex file is
not based on my .tex files. I have no idea of why you would like to do
such a thing, though.

I am aware, though, that some of these sources may be of help to other
people, especially at X, who want to write their thesis in LaTeX. This
is why I have lifted all copyright restrictions on some files: you are
totally free to use the files
       these.cls
       these.tex
       pre/title.tex
in your own work with no restrictions (not even citing my name). You
are also free to use the file symb.gst, but the restrictions of the
LPPL apply because it is based on the LPPL licensed file basic.gst,
part of the memoir class.

Finally, the drawings by Rachel are licensed under the same license as
the thesis itself, so that you are free to include these fine pieces
of art in your own work at their maximum quality (yes, it's vector
graphics)!


			      Disclaimer

This license is entirely hand-crafted and I am no lawyer. It may
contain serious holes and drawbacks, I wouldn't recommend anyone using
it for its own work.
